ORDNANCE. 511

MR. GRAHAM. And how about the one at Brunswick, Ga.?
COL. HAWKINS. That was a pretty good-sized village.
MR. GRAHAM. The houses were modern, were they?
COL. HAWKINS. Maj. Hindman says they had a jim-crow law down there, and it depends upon whether it was the white or the colored village.
MR. GRAHAM. Were the towns built with sewers, waterworks, and all that sort of thing?
COL. HAWKINS. Yes, sir.
MR. GRAHAM. And with paved streets?
COL. HAWKINS. I do not think we got very far in the paving line.
MR. GRAHAM. You were working at it, were you?
COL. HAWKINS. Yes, sir.
MR. GRAHAM. Knowing, as you did, that a picric-acid plant must necessarily be only for use and operation during the war and that after the war was over you would have no further use for such a plant, why were not those buildings made of temporary character, such as would suffice for the period of the war and to be abandoned after the war was over?
COL. HAWKINS. I think they were built just as cheaply as they could. That is my observation of the plants; the greatest expense was in machinery, piping, and all that.
MR. GRAHAM. What was the necessity for building a village or town at each of those plants when you knew that it was going to be abandoned after the war was over? And why did you put in sewerage and lights and waterworks and moving-picture shows and all that sort of thing—what was that for?
COL. HAWKINS. Speaking first about the loading plant at Amatol, 25 miles from Atlantic City, we could not get people to go out there. We had to build rather attractive accommodations for them to get them there. It was very hard to get any there. We had to make it just as attractive as we could in order to get people to stay there; particularly in view of the knowledge of most people of the danger. The Morgan, N.J., plant blew all to pieces on the 4th of October, and we had all sorts of trouble getting people to work from that time on. And we had to take soldier labor and put soldiers in some of these plants. We had considerable labor at the plants after that explosion, and before that we were offering them every sort of inducement to get people to work in those plants, and we had to make it pretty attractive to them.
MR. GRAHAM. You were paying the highest kind of wages?
COL. HAWKINS. Yes, sir; paying good wages.
MR. GRAHAM. And paying the demands that they made in the way of wages?
COL. HAWKINS. We had to pay a lot.
MR. GRAHAM. I think that is all.
COL. HAWKINS. Yes, sir.
