PEOPLE ARISE TO DISCOVER EVIDENCES OF GOVERNMENT’S WAR ACTIVITIES 
GREAT TRACT TAKEN OVER
Elwood Stores and Homes Under Lease and Residents Prepare To Leave.
Atlantic City, March 3.

Transformed over-night from a peaceful Atlantic County hamlet into the nucleus of a great $11,000,000 shell-loading plant, Elwood, 25 miles from the resort, has been figuratively rubbing its eyes all day. When Elwoodians retired to rest last night they were surrounded by the quiet and calm that have characterized their community since the coming of the first settler.

When they awoke today a large force of strangers had landed in their midst; their eyes beheld on the little-used side-track of the West Jersey & Seashore Railroad a half hundred freight cars bearing the legend, “Ordnance Department, U. S. A.,” and heavy motor trucks similarly decorated, chugged noisily about the quiet streets. 

Amazed at the transformation, and, with few exceptions entirely ignorant of its cause, the people immediately began diligent inquiries and were amazed to learn that their town had been chosen as the directing center of a great industrial project, the construction of which will begin tomorrow morning.

They learned that the strangers were made up of real estate men, whose work in securing the huge tract on which a shell-loading plant will stand has been practically completed; of construction workers in the employ of the Atlantic Loading Company, of New York, to which has been awarded the work of erecting the plant; and a force of engineers attached to the War Department. 

The Government representatives, they found, had come to talk business, and an hour after they had located Arthur Walker, proprietor of the Griswold Garden Tea Room, a favorite haunt for automobilists, they had bought the building and had begun the work of transforming it into a central office.

Daniel B. Frazier, owner of a great part of the tract on which the new war industry will stand, worked diligently with J. B. Manly, of Somers Point, as his agent, among the few owners of the property who were holding out for bigger prices. They had practically completed their task before the day closed, and the word went out tonight that work on the great plant will positively begin tomorrow.

Two hundred men will arrive late tonight and this number will be increased to at least 1000 before tomorrow night. 

Options have been secured on the entire town of Elwood, including stores and residences, and the whole hamlet will in all probability be purchased by the big steel company behind the project for housing its thousands of employees during the construction of the plant.

Building contractors visited the hamlet during the day, picking out the most desirable sites for barracks for workmen and other structures which will be used while the work of erection is going on.

The space on which the plant will be erected, made up for the most part of the Frazier and Jarmlusky tracts, is bounded in triangle shape by Hammonton, Elwood and Indian Mills, comprising several thousand acres. 