LOCATE WAR PLANT AT TOMS RIVER 
Atlantic Loading Co. Will Make Shells at New Factory--To Employ 20,000 Men. 
TOMS RIVER, Feb. 21

People in this section of Ocean County are very much interested over the announcement that the Atlantic Loading company of New York has practically decided to locate the big loading plant at this place. There has been a good deal of uncertainty for the past two weeks as to where the plant would be located, four sites having been under consideration: the Davenport tract here, the Bidwell-Stone property at Lakehurst, the Cedar Crest site, and a site at Hammonton. 

Engineers of the War Department have been here for more than two weeks plotting and testing out the ground, and while no exact statement has been made as to the selection, an automobile load of blueprints for the buildings arrived from New York last night, followed by 10 engineers and contractors today. 

Officials of the War Department and of the Atlantic Loading Company have been in consultation all day with George W. Holman, president of the Ocean County Trust Company, William M. Blecher, editor of the Toms River Courier, and George O. Van Ness, president of the County Tax Board, who have been the leaders in the fight to get the plant located here, and they’ve practically assured them the site here will be selected. 

The plant will load shells for the government, and not manufacture ammunition, as was at first stated. The proposed site is along the main line of the Pennsylvania Railroad, having a railroad frontage of more than five miles, and will consist of some 900 acres. Options on all the land have been secured and are in the hands of the engineers while the titles are being searched at the county clerk’s office. 

It has been stated that the plant will open with 400 men and will increase until 20,000 are employed. 

It had been the original intention of the company to locate at Hanover Farms, 10 miles west of this place, and work was begun, when it was discovered that the water used at the plant came from the same stream that supplies Camp Dix, and the work was stopped on orders from the War Department. Immediately the board of trade put the matter in the hands of Mr. Holman, Mr. Blecher, and Mr. Van Ness, who secured options on this tract with the result so far achieved. 

The site under consideration is located on what is locally known as the Chemical Company property and the Davenport section. The Chemical property was owned and operated by the Davis Chemical Company for a number of years and was later recarried into the bankruptcy courts by the creditors of the company. 