INTRODUCTION
BY JAMES BLAINE WALKER
Secretary Public Service Commission, 1st Dist. New York; Author of "Fifty Years of Rapid Transit," etc.

FOR MANY YEARS travelers on the Pennsylvania Railroad, between Philadelphia and Atlantic City, have viewed from the car windows apparently interminable stretches of flat, sandy country covered with a thick growth of scrub oak, small pine trees and a dense undergrowth of brush. Many have speculated as to what practical use this great stretch of land, useless in its present state for agricultural purposes and yet most advantageously located, could be devoted. Quite unexpectedly the necessities of war brought a large portion of it into practical use. The Atlantic Loading Company, a corporation formed in New York City, entered into a contract with the Government to build and operate a shell loading plant as the agent of the Government. The officers of the company immediately began looking for a site for the contemplated plant, and this section of New Jersey attracted their attention. It was comparatively isolated and yet traversed by important railroad lines which afforded ample transportation facilities for men and materials. The soil was easily worked and there was available a subterranean supply of excellent water readily tapped by driving wells. The moderate, healthful and equable climate was also suitable for a large industrial community.

Early in the year 1918 the Company acquired for the Government a tract of 6000 acres of this land lying near the town of Hammonton, New Jersey. The Company began work on March 4th, 1918, and within a few months had cleared the land, laid out and built a new town and an enormous plant, peopled the former with workmen and equipped the latter with machinery and begun the loading of shell. The transformation of the wilderness into a hive of industry within such a short time was one of the many war-time marvels of American engineering achievement. The history of the work is a story of the accomplishment of brain power, engineering talent and the genius of American business organization, which reflects the highest credit upon all concerned.

The leaders in the formation of the Atlantic Loading Company were O. J. Salisbury, of Salt Lake City, Utah, J. D. Evans, of the Evans Engineering Corporation, and the Electric Bond and Share Company, of New York, both of whom have had extensive experience in the financing and construction of large works. The new Company was formed by taking the pick of men from several large organizations, including that of the Electric Bond and Share Company, so that each of its men was made up of experts. This method of selecting suitable men was followed throughout the organization, the financial and administrative chiefs as well as the engineers being picked men.

The new organization having in its personnel many of the pioneers in the quantity loading of high explosive shell, embodied in its plant at Amatol the best, most economical and safest methods which could be devised for facilitating and speeding up production. Some of these methods were developed by the Company's own engineers: the power belt conveyor system, which permits the continuous movement of shell through the various operations within the central loading building, is one feature. The men placed in charge of operating the plant thus brought to the work at Amatol the skill necessary to successful operation. The speed with which the call of the Government was met, the co-ordination of plant and men and the results obtained which provided for every contingency stand out as prominent features of the work.

In the following pages Mr. Hammel, the Company's Chief Engineer, and a Member of the American Society of Civil Engineers, has creditably presented an all-too-brief history of this great undertaking, which includes an interesting description of the plant and the town, their construction, operation, capacity, and the efficient organization which made them possible. It is eminently fitting that a permanent record should be made of the achievements of the Company, which may well be proud of its work, for success never attended a larger undertaking initiated and carried through in such a short time and in the face of so many difficulties.

Amatol, New Jersey
January, 1919