SCOPE OF THE WORK

In April, 1917, when the United States declared war on Germany, and began the work of enlarging the Army and Navy and providing for the needed supply of food, clothing and munitions, its greatest task was to provide for the manufacture of munitions. The needed men were here; it only remained to draft and drill them. Food and clothing were being produced; it only remained to stimulate production. But to provide for an ample supply of munitions new factories had to be built and peacetime works transformed into gun and shell producers.

The achievements of 1918 showed how well this work had been done in 1917. Once the lathes and the forges were working it became necessary to supply the high explosives with which to charge the shell they turned out, and to provide extensive machinery for doing the charging. Contracts were made for the production on a vast scale of trinitrotoluol, the destructive explosive used in modern big gun ammunition, and other contracts for the construction of plants for the loading of the shell as fast as the mills turned them out.

Four large shell loading plants were projected and eventually placed in operation, namely, those of the Bethlehem Loading Co., the T. A. Gillespie Loading Co., the DuPont Engineering Co. and the Atlantic Loading Company. Of these the plant of the Atlantic Loading Company is the largest. It is located at Amatol, New Jersey—a town which came into being to house its workers, and is about 25 miles from Atlantic City, adjacent to and north of the Pennsylvania and the Reading railroads. The site consists of a tract of approximately 6,000 acres of land, with its western boundary about six miles east of Hammonton, New Jersey.

The history of the Atlantic Loading Company is a story of organization, construction and production in quick-step time. It entered into a contract with the Ordnance Department of the Government to act as its agent in loading and storing shell, and it conducted its work and enterprise from first to last in accordance with the rules and regulations of that department. It began the work of construction on its plant on March 4, 1918, began operations the following July, and in August loaded its first shell, and in the meantime it also had built the new town of Amatol. An indication of the high speed with which its operations were conducted may be found in the fact that within twenty-four hours after the site was finally determined upon, actual work on clearing the land for the plant was under way.

The enterprise combined two separate and distinct undertakings, either of which in itself would require an organization embracing high skill, initiative and intensive working power. One was the rapid construction of a large shell loading plant, the other the building of a town to provide proper quarters for the thousands of workers whose employment was contemplated. To meet the requirements of the Ordnance Department the plant had to be brought to a producing basis at the earliest day possible, and to do this the town had to be built and made ready to house the workers at the same time.

It was in contemplation of this that the Atlantic Loading Company was incorporated under the laws of the State of Maine in December, 1917. The stated purposes of the corporation were: first, to construct and operate a shell loading plant for the production of completed rounds of ammunition and to provide the necessary storage capacity therefor; second, to build a town for the housing of the operatives. The plant was designed to be the largest of its type in the country, providing for the loading of shell of all sizes from 75 mm, to 10-inch drop bombs, depth bombs, rifle grenades, hand grenades and boosters. The charter provisions were very broad, in order to permit the Company to enter into contracts for construction of any and all kinds, such as steam and electric railroads, manufacturing plants, electrical transmission lines, power developments, buildings and bridges.

The Atlantic Loading Company is the tri-party control of O. J. Salisbury, of Salt Lake City, Utah; J. D. Evans, of the Evans Engineering Corporation; and the Electric Bond & Share Company. Both Mr. Salisbury and Mr. Evans were fully equipped for the great undertaking, having had long and varied experience in the financing and creation of extensive industrial developments, mining operations and public utility enterprises. The Electric Bond & Share Company is known as one of the country’s most successful companies engaged in the financing and operation of public utilities.

The first task of these three interests was to create the organization needed for the new work. As it stands to-day, the organization of the Atlantic Loading Company covers all the various phases of its work, including finance, male and female employment, accounting, engineering, purchasing, construction, operating, housing, commissary, medical work, sanitation and welfare. In all of these departments the greatest efficiency has been developed.

At the beginning of March, 1918, the site of the plant was an unbroken tract, mostly wooded, with some acres of swamp. The land was of a kind peculiarly difficult to clear for building construction, owing to the dense, tangled nature of the growth. Nine months later it was covered with a plant which has turned out ammunition of many types in large quantities, including drop bombs and large shell; and in addition a town capable of properly housing over 10,000 people, with the many needed buildings for administration, auxiliary operation, recreation, etc., has been built.

At the outset it was necessary to obtain carpenters and other workmen, lumber, commissary outfits and supplies. Within the first week the first bunkhouse and mess hall were up, housing and feeding an initial force of forty men. From the beginning the work expanded with ever-increasing rapidity, buildings going up almost over night. The speed in construction may be gauged by the fact that, during a period of nine months, the Company constructed an average of about four buildings of various kinds a day, from construction office up to such large structures as loading, administration, mess and dormitory buildings.

Besides the building construction for plant and town there was a great amount of auxiliary construction, consisting in part of about fifty miles of standard gauge railroad track, water supply, sewerage systems, thirty miles of 66,000-volt transmission line and other power systems, telephone and telegraph systems, centralized heating plants and electric-lighting stations. It was because that the rapidity with which the plant was placed under way was in a large measure fundamental to the fact that the living conditions and the town were fundamentally correct. “Speed—simplicity—results” were the watchwords in the construction of plant and town, but nevertheless all structures were substantially built.

Semi-fire-proof construction of stucco and “Composite” metal unit was determined upon; and it is an interesting fact that this durable type of building was successfully used at almost the same cost as ordinary cantonment construction—very little in excess of the cost of wood and, in many cases, cheaper. The use of fabricated steel structures, assembled in panels at the factory, facilitated erection and aided in the “record” completion of the 75 mm plant. Standardized unit “A” frame steel structures were also used. An inspection of the accompanying photographs will indicate the elasticity of this standardized construction. The units being bolted together, the structure can be wrecked and readily converted into a large variety of manufacturing buildings. This steel construction was adopted because of the salvage value of the material.

The fact that stands out most sharply in connection with this vast enterprise is that while the Company has built substantially, it has also built quickly. Precisely what this has meant in physical construction is shown by the concrete figures given in the following statistical table:

These statistics cover the development as planned. The signing of the armistice caused the suspension of construction work and also some result some work for which material was purchased and delivered was not completed. About 90 per cent. of the construction was finished and in addition the actual loading of shell had been carried on for several months.

Loading operations began July 31, 1918.

First shell loaded (75 m. m. and drop bombs) August 3, 1918.

AREAS
Total acreage of reservation: 6,000
Acreage of operating plant: 2,550
Acreage of loading company town: 1,000
Acres cleared in general: 3,680
Acres cleared in town: 1,150
Acres trimmed in town: 255

DISTANCES
Extreme length of plant: 2 miles
Extreme breadth of plant: 2 miles
Extreme length of town: 1.5 miles
Extreme breadth of town: 1 mile
Length of protective fence: 15 miles

WATER SUPPLY AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
Water supply system max capacity: 1,750,000 gals.
Water mains—town: 9 miles
Water mains—plant: 20 miles
Water tanks 50,000 gals.—plant: 6
Water tanks 50,000 gals.—town: 1
Water tanks 10 ft. × 10 ft.—plant: 3
Wells—town: 7
Wells—plant: 3
Sewer mains—town: 11 miles

LIGHT AND POWER SYSTEMS
Steam-electric station—plant: 1
Steam-electric station—town: 1
Lighting and power wire—plant: 200 miles
Lighting and power wire—town: 50 miles
66,000 volt transmission system: 30 miles
(Atlantic City line 23 miles; Mays Landing line 7 miles)
Electric street lights—town: 130
Yard light—plant: 300
Lights for fence protection: 400
Searchlights: 6

HEATING SYSTEMS
Mains—plant: 13 miles
Mains—town: 2 miles
Steam heating stations—plant: 5
Steam heating station—town: 1

RAILROADS
Total ultimate length of track: 50 miles
Locomotives: 10
Passenger coaches: 30

ROADWAYS
Miles of roadway—plant: 18 miles
Miles of roadway—town: 14 miles
Wood walks—plant: 1 mile
Wood walks—town: 4 miles

TELEPHONES
Exchanges: 2
Trunk lines: 10 miles
Telephones—plant and town: 385
Ultimate capacity: 1,300 lines
Wire in plant: 25 miles
Wire in town: 25 miles

STRUCTURES
Floor area in sq. ft.—plant: 2,615,662
Floor area in sq. ft.—town: 778,822
Plant buildings placed end to end would cover: 11 miles
Town buildings placed end to end would cover: 4 miles
Total number of structures: 1,107
Plant structures: 642
Town structures: 465
Loading buildings: 132
Storage buildings and magazines: 159
Administration buildings: 4
Office buildings: 6
Industrial buildings: 9
Hospitals: 7
Recreation centres: 2
Mess halls: 12
Garages: 4
Warehouses: 7
Railroad structures: 6
Stables: 4
Guardhouses, sentry boxes, searchlights, etc.: 10
Commercial stores: 21

Structures (continued)
Dormitories and bunkhouses—male: 98
Dormitories—female: 21
Miscellaneous buildings: 140
Army barracks: 24
Y.M.C.A.'s: 4
Individual residences: 11
Multiple houses: 33
Workmen’s houses: 227
Post office: 1
School house: 1
Fire houses: 2
Tent tops: 444
Family apartments—two rooms: 96
Family apartments—four rooms: 179
Family apartments—three rooms: 23

MISCELLANEOUS
Steel required for plant buildings: 6,000 tons
Square feet of plaster board: 1,350,000
Square feet of “Composite” metal lath: 4,000,000
Ft. B.M. lumber: 30,000,000
Squares of ruberoid: 27,200
Square feet of stucco: 3,550,000
Power driven belt conveyors: 12 miles
Conveyor housing: 5 miles
Fire alarm wire—plant: 40 miles
Fire alarm wire—town: 12 miles
Average buildings built per day: 4