ORGANIZATION
"With any large undertaking the keynote to success is organization," and the efficiency of an organization depends upon the correct division of the work in hand among several departments and the proper co-ordination of those departments one with another. In the Amatol project organization was particularly vital because of the rapidity with which the work had to be done and of the many new problems presented.

The very nature of the work required an organization of experts. These were drafted from going concerns engaged in large construction and financial enterprises. Loading shell with high explosives is a hazardous undertaking, and the men who formed the Atlantic Loading Company realized this. They summoned to their aid only men of broad experience along similar lines who had proven their fitness in successful work elsewhere. In an incredibly short time a suitable organization was mapped out and the necessary specialists were recruited to head the several departments.

OFFICERS
O. J. Salisbury, President & General Manager
J. D. Evans, Vice President & Operating Manager
C. E. Groesbeck, Vice President
G. E. Claflin, Vice President
A. E. Smith, Secretary-Treasurer

DIRECTORS
O. J. Salisbury
J. D. Evans, President, Evans Engineering Corporation
C. E. Groesbeck, Vice President, Electric Bond & Share Company
E. K. Hall, Vice President, Electric Bond & Share Company
G. E. Claflin, Vice President, Electric Bond & Share Company

Simplicity and effectiveness marked the division of the work into departments, each aligned with its function. The staff was as follows:

OPERATING MANAGER'S DEPARTMENT
Assistant Operating Manager: 1
Chief Clerk: 1
Stenographers: 5
Clerks: 5

ENGINEERING
Chief Engineer: 1
Assistant Chief Engineer: 1
Consulting Engineers: 2
Resident Engineer: 1
Assistants to Chief Engineer: 3
Sanitary and Water Supply Engineer: 1
Mechanical Engineer: 1
Electrical Engineer: 1
Material Engineer: 1
Development Engineer: 1
Civil and Structural Engineer: 1
Consulting Architect: 1
Architect: 1
Cost Engineer: 1
Chief Chemist: 1
Assistant Chemists: 3
Engineers and Draftsmen: 7
Field Men (Instruments, Rodmen, etc.): 65
Clerks, Stenographers, etc.: 9

CONSTRUCTION
General Construction Superintendent: 1
Assistant General Construction Superintendent: 1
Construction Engineers: 10
Foremen and Sub-Foremen: 54
Stenographers, Clerks, etc.: 2

The Company had about 5,500 men on construction work, including all crafts, such as carpenters, plumbers, electricians, plasterers, lathe workers, machinists, boiler makers, painters, teamsters, pipe fitters, riggers, tinsmiths, cement worker, and laborers. In addition, there were about 1,800 enlisted men engaged a portion of the time.

PLANT OPERATION
Works Manager: 1
Assistant Works Managers: 2
General Superintendent: 1
Chief of Police: 1
Superintendents: 4
Foremen and Supervisors: 26

There are also about 1,000 operatives working in the plant, including skilled mechanics of all classes, as well as laborers, both male and female. About 2,000 enlisted men were also detailed to plant operation at various times.

ACCOUNTING
Treasurer: 1
Chief Accountant: 1
Plant Auditor: 1
Town Auditor: 1
Accountants, Bookkeepers, etc.: 75
Clerks, Stenographers, etc.: 200
Paymaster: 1
Payroll Clerks: 64
Time Checkers: 112

INDUSTRIAL SERVICE
Superintendent: 1
Garage Manager: 1
Railway Superintendent: 1
Chauffeurs: 15
Locomotive Engineers: 15
Locomotive Firemen: 15
Locomotive Brakemen: 15
Automobile Mechanics: 10
Chief of Police: 1
Captains: 2
Lieutenants: 4
Guards: 500

There are about 95 passenger automobiles, besides a large number of auto trucks, horses, wagons, etc.

Stenographers, Clerks, etc.: 19

TOWN
Town Manager: 1
Renting Agent: 1
Town Superintendent: 1
Commissary Superintendent: 1
Stenographers, Clerks, etc.: 24
Commissary Heads: 3
Cooks: 39
Assistant Cooks and Kitchen Help: 247
Waitresses: 18
Between 15,000 and 20,000 meals are prepared and served daily.

HOSPITAL
Physicians: 6
Orderlies and Nurses: 13
Clerks: 1

PURCHASING
Purchasing Agent: 1
Assistant Purchasing Agent: 1
Buyers: 10
Clerks and Stenographers: 21
Expeditors: 16

MALE EMPLOYMENT
Employment Superintendent: 1
Employment Agents: 2
Clerks, Stenographers, etc.: 15

FEMALE EMPLOYMENT AND WELFARE
Superintendent: 1
Assistants: 3
Housekeepers, Matrons, etc.: 30

The above classification gives the framework of the organization and indicated the distribution of the work. It does not, however, and in the nature of things could not, disclose the character of the problems faced by the several departments and successfully evolved. It is impossible to describe these in detail, but a few illustrations will give the reader a better idea of the difficulties which were met and surmounted. 

Construction naturally was the first thing on the programme. In all construction the two main factors are labor and materials. Even in normal times these factors are difficult problems in any large undertaking. In the early part of the year 1918, with the whole country absorbed in war work and with normal conditions completely upset, they presented ten-fold more difficulties. To get labor with which to build its plant and town the Company was compelled to go into a labor market booming from unprecedented demand and to bid against high wages in all industries. But the problem was solved by making the work attractive and providing the best living and housing conditions for the workers.

To get the materials with which to build was no less difficult. Those were the days of unlimited demand and undeveloped supplies, of congested freight carrying facilities and Government priority orders for shipments. It was easy to order supplies, but quite another matter to get them. The purchasing department of the Company rose to the emergency by organizing a special expediting division. This division dispatched men to various seats of supply, such as the lumber mills of the South, and these men followed the orders placed by the Company until the materials were turned out and shipped. Other men experienced in freight shipping were stationed at junction points to set shipments straight and give advance notice of their coming. This expediting service brought results, and at the high point of operations the Company had no less than 700 cars of material in transit at one time. Simultaneously the construction was moving steadily and uninterruptedly.

Purchase of supplies necessarily was made on a vast scale to meet the demands of these several departments, totaling many millions of dollars during the period of eight months. The purchasing department, in order to do this work, had a force of 300 persons engaged at one time. These included the office in Philadelphia, where purchases were made, and that at Amatol, where the traffic and the routing of shipments and invoices were handled.

New problems also confronted the financial and accounting department. As the Company was acting as agent of the Government it was necessary for the treasurer’s office to make the complex accounting and auditing systems synchronize with those of the Government. This was successfully done and the payrolls and disbursements of funds were made to conform with Government requirements. It was accomplished by a system of invoice accounting, checking materials and the final approval and payment of invoices through the Government disbursing office. All records of such disbursements were carried into the Company’s field account and corresponded exactly with the records of the Government’s accounting division. Payroll disbursements also were made in accordance with Government requirements as to checking of time, distribution of labor costs and proper disbursement of funds. No question as to payrolls ever arose between the Company and the Government—a fact in which the Company may feel a degree of pride. Accounting methods also were made to fit the special requirements of the plant and town operations.

In every other department similar problems were presented and successfully solved, and they would not have been possible had it not been for the character of the personnel, so admirably fitted for the work. In the construction department the Company has had in its service some of the best men known to organizations having wide experience on many of the largest pieces of construction throughout the country.

On its engineering staff it had men with special experience in hydro-electric and other extensive developments. These men were thoroughly familiar with all kinds of material, all phases of construction work and had behind them command data collected through years of important development work. Associated with them as consultants were Clinton D. Mackenzie, Consulting Architect, and Clyde Potts, Consulting Engineer on sewerage and water.

The work of the Women’s Department went on and women, was made very difficult, because of the shortage incident to the demands made upon them by the abnormal war industrial activities. Admirable results were obtained, particularly by the Superintendent of Women to whom was entrusted the direct direction of the organizations for recreational and communal life, as well as the employment and housing of women.
