PLANT OPERATION
In mountainous countries where precious metal ores are milled or smelted at the mines the works are built if possible on the side of a hill, so that the ore enters at the top and descends by the aid of gravity until it reaches the last process at the bottom. A similar plan to minimize the handling of shell was devised by the Atlantic Loading Company and put into successful use at the Amatol works. Instead of the force of gravity, power belt conveyors are used, and these conveyors carry the shell from the receiving building through all successive processes until they are delivered, finished at the end of the unit for shipment. The conveyors are also great time savers and are one of the principal factors for speedy production. They consist of endless belts riding on fixed rollers in narrow tramways, laid on the floors or on the level of the working benches. The total length of the conveyor lines is 12 miles.

Shell Journey on the Conveyor
The journey of a shell along the conveyor line in any of the units is an interesting demonstration of the time and labor-saving nature of the device. Whether the shell be large or small, it is placed lengthwise on the conveyor belt and moves along at a constant speed to the next process. When it reaches the proper point a workman stationed there simply rolls it off the belt on the bench. At practically no time is it necessary to lift the shell at all, the workman rolling it along flat as he does his task to another workman, who does his particular job and either passes it along by rolling or rolls it back on the conveyor, which carries it to the next process. In the case of large, heavy shell this method not only saves time, but a vast amount of physical exertion.

Initial Shell Preparation
In the receiving building the shells are received, cleaned and shellaced. Empty shell storage space is here provided for 15 to 20 days' production. When received at the plant the shell have their copper or metal shipping gags screwed in the nose, and the first process is the removal of these plugs. This is a machine operation. The remover heads are placed at a revolving shaft, and the men engage the plug and unscrew it.

Sequential Processing
From the receiving building the shell are carried forward to each successive stage on conveyor lines, which finally converge in the packing and shipping building.

Amatol, which is the main charge pressed into the shell (unless straight trinitrotoluol (T.N.T.) or a 50/50 mix is used) contains 80% ammonium nitrate and 20% T.N.T.

Mixing Ammonium Nitrate and T.N.T.
The ammonium nitrate is crushed and dried before mixing. The T.N.T. is melted and the two are mixed in the kettle room. The kettles have hot water jackets, heated by a steam coil within the jacket, and each kettle is provided with an agitator. The total charge of a kettle is about 800 pounds, and a melt is obtained every two hours. When a mixture is used the amount of T.N.T. needed is first melted in the kettle and then hot ammonium nitrate is added until a full charge of proper proportions is obtained.

When T.N.T. is poured, the material is drawn off into stirring tubs. Stirring is necessary because of the rapid crystallization of T.N.T. when cooling begins, which might cause exudation in the charge. The material is therefore stirred with wooden paddles to break up the large crystals into smaller crystals and give a more even charge. The stirring tubs are mounted on wheels and move along tracks to the shell. The empty shell dies, before the pouring process, are brought to the pouring house and filled with hot sand to expel the air. The solution is sprayed on the inside shell by a spray nozzle. They are wheeled to the pouring conveyor, passing through a special gate, which also heats the shell and allows them to run automatically into the pouring process. The shells bodies are run into the pouring building on specially heavy conveyors. A rubber tube is placed in the nose of each, through which the charge is poured in small quantities to prevent holes forming in the loading. In the case of 75 mm shells, they need be only one pouring.

When straight T.N.T. is used the method of pouring is slightly different. A short hose, however, is poured into the body of the boulder and then straight T.N.T. is poured to the top of the funnel. This method permits extremely rapid production. The portion of the explosive in the funnel is termed the “pouring head" and the purpose of filling above the shell is merely that the point of extreme crystallization, which takes place rapidly when the explosive is exposed to air, may be above the outside of the shell itself.

To further reduce the possibility of cavitation when 50/50 is poured, a metal wire is thrust into the shell charge just after the pouring, and withdrawn in a few seconds; this having a tendency to make crystallization uniform throughout. Results have shown that this produces a charge of even texture and of the specified density.

After the charge is poured the "pouring head" is removed and re-used later, the use of a 50 per cent. proportion being permissible, provided it is within 48 hours of the original pouring.

The shell now go to the cooling room where they are stored for eight or nine hours until completely cooled. They are then drilled to receive the booster and the thread is thoroughly cleaned to remove all explosive that may have collected. The cavity for the booster is next shellacked to waterproof it in the event that the booster is not placed immediately. This, however, is not necessary if the booster is inserted at once.

The cartridge case is filled with smokeless powder, the latter being weighed with automatic weighing machines. Shell bodies and cartridge cases then go to the assembling building, where they are partly assembled by hand and finally crimped together in the assembling and crimping machine. Gauging and weighing come next in the operation of making the shell ready for the booster. The shell is now to go to the building where the booster, which detonates the charge, is placed in the cavity drilled for it. The booster is a steel case charged with tetryl. The shell now go by conveyor to the packing shed, and thence to the shipping building.

An important intermediate stage is the stenciling of the shell, so that the gunner may know by the marking in what zone it will fall. Throughout the process of handling the shells, Government inspectors keep watch on all operations. It is the purpose that the progress of the shell throughout the plant shall be continuous, both for speed in expediting the work and, so far as possible, storage at any of the various stages.

While the pressure of war needs was on, it was necessary to load amatol rather than straight T.N.T. Owing to the impossibility of obtaining T.N.T. in sufficient quantities the mix with ammonium nitrate was at the time imperative. The mix has as high explosive power as T.N.T., the one disadvantage of using it being that ammonium nitrate absorbs moisture rapidly, and in time deteriorates. The life of the shell loaded with straight T.N.T. is indefinite—certainly 25 years—while the condition of shell loaded with amatol would be uncertain after perhaps five years. In loading, every possible precaution, such as shellacing, is necessary to exclude moisture when amatol is used. The plant loads straight T.N.T. when adequate supply is obtainable.

As it leaves the plant the shell is complete, except for the placing of the fuse, an operation which is done at the battlefront.

In the matter of protection, the plant has been covered in many respects beyond the usual means of care to lessen risk. The operating buildings are practically all steel-frame with composite lath and cement construction or corrugated metal sides. Hydrants are placed inside and outside the building in such position that all parts can be covered with water. One hundred feet of hose is provided for each outside hydrant. Hose racks are placed in the buildings at short intervals and fire buckets 20 feet apart. A water line points out all hydrants and the location of hose, and a water line is carried completely around the plant. There is a constant system of inspection of buckets and apparatus.

In the matter of cleanliness and sanitation generally the plant operation in the matter of cleanliness was none too moderate. Operating rooms were thoroughly and rigidly inspected by a special force whose duty it was: the purpose being not to let it pile up and then dispose of it, but actually to prevent accumulation. Buildings where T.N.T. is poured were kept under constant cleaning and are flushed out with steam daily. Exhaust apparatus removes dust from the atmosphere.

A safety patrol was maintained whose duty it was not only to take care of waste, but to remove any operative whose health became impaired.

Personal cleanliness among operatives was required by constant watchfulness on the part of nurses and Government inspectors. The nurses and matron in charge of T.N.T. treated dust as a deadly poison and took care of it as such. Women operatives working on T.N.T. Besides this the matron and physicians took care of hygiene, weeding out unfit workers. Men, as well as women, were examined. Medical expert make frequent inspections not only to supervise matters of hygiene, but to remove any operative whose health becomes impaired.