THE TOWN OF AMATOL
The town of Amatol, which is named after one of the explosives used in the plant, covers a tract of about 350 acres lying to the northeast of the plant. A distance of upward of two miles separates the closest points between town and plant.

The town is located on a natural eminence, a few miles distant from the famous New Jersey coast resorts and is within the territory that comes under the influence of the Gulf Stream. The wood growth is largely the pines that have given to this section its reputation for healthfulness; and in clearing the land for the town, most of these trees, together with oaks, have been left standing.

The industrial section of the town was made a long, narrow block reaching well in toward the center, and in this was built one branch of the railroad, all of the warehouses, the material storage yards, garages, heating plant, laundry, wood working shop and similar commercial structures.

The impression given by a first view of Amatol is that of a well-kept suburban settlement. The town was not thrown together merely to put roofs and walls around its working people at night, but was built to keep its population satisfied with its surroundings and living conditions and tuned for the rapid production for which the establishment was designed.

The town was planned on a basis of a possible population of 25,000. The houses were designed for speedy construction, yet planned to resist weather—the quickest, most economical construction capable of affording comfort and protection.

The first impressive view of Liberty Court as one enters the town through West J Street is the keynote of the complete scheme. In the planning of the town thought was given to its general attractiveness as well as to the quick housing of its people. It was designed to be a town rather than a group of buildings without idea of symmetry. The rule of about twelve houses to the net acre—that is, land, excluding road—was generally adopted as the ideal spacing to afford ample room for gardens, to prevent an appearance of crowding and to minimize the fire risk. Besides this, provision was made for extent of outlook by arranging breaks in the street lines, by setting the houses back or placing them around courts and by planning roads to give a command of a distant view or to lead on to open spaces.

In the planning of roads attractiveness was sought throughout. Around the central part of the town extends an oval-shaped roadway about 800 feet in length and across this runs a central parkway. This has the advantage of breaking the vistas and of giving an always changing view.

It is doubtless for this reason, in part, that the first impression of the town, with its stucco buildings, is that it was constructed for permanence. Unlike most quick-operation towns there is none of the hit-or-miss appearance, but, instead, a harmonious effect in every feature.

The housing facilities may be roughly grouped as follows: dormitories, residences, multiple houses, workmen’s houses and bunkhouses.

Of the women’s dormitories the largest group or unit was planned to accommodate 800. The largest single dormitory built for women has 150 single rooms. There are three classes of women’s dormitories, namely, one for plant operatives, a second for women office help and the third for the women inspectors. These have accommodated up to 1,000 working people from these three classes.

A good illustration of this class of structures is the girls’ dormitory for the use of office workers. Dignified, yet simple in its exterior, it is arranged throughout for comfortable living. A big living room, 60 feet in length, has a fireplace at each end and simple but attractive furnishings. The room includes a piano, long tables, lounges and easy chairs, and leading from it are numerous little alcove rooms for entertaining.

The building is “H” shaped, its center being given to the living room, a sun parlor and general rooms, while its two side wings contain the dormitory rooms, each for one occupant only; and its furnishing includes bed, bureau, table and chair. There is a complete laundry with drying apparatus, as well as a diet kitchen, infirmary and shower. It would, indeed, be difficult to design a building better suited to its purposes, comfortable in its construction and within its walls all the accessories for the proper housing of its occupants. This building, affording living facilities for 150 girls, may well be termed a model of its class.

All dormitory buildings have complete toilet arrangements and showers. The bunkhouses also are fully equipped in this respect. Many have telephone service, which connect with all offices, mess halls, dormitories, etc.

Of the various mess halls, the largest, the general mess hall, has a seating capacity of 800 in each wing, or 1,600 in all. In it, 6,000 people can be served in an hour. The staff mess hall, with a seating capacity of 450, has served 700 persons at one meal, the service being on the cafeteria system.

The houses are of three general classes—single residences, workmen's houses and multiple-type houses. The residences have from six to nine rooms, the workmen's houses from two to five rooms, and the multiple houses from four to six rooms. All are steam-heated, underdrained and have modern toilet arrangements, including shower baths. Other types, varying in the number of rooms from four to eight, are projected.

The general office building, 200 feet in length, has 32 offices. Adjacent to it are the various other town administration buildings.

One projected group of buildings, some completed, others moving towards completion, is a Y. M. C. A. unit, including swimming pool, gymnasium with stage, bowling alley, billiard rooms and refreshment and lounging rooms.

While the general residence section centers about Liberty Court, with its commercial shops and its commodious theatre, the offices occupy an area by themselves.

Building Methods and Comfort
The method of construction of the buildings is, generally speaking, cement stucco on a composite metal lath, sometimes called "brick lath." This lath is a mesh of steel wire, upon which brick clay has been pressed and baked so as to enclose the wire in brick or terra cotta while leaving the fabric flexible. It comes rolled in strips 40 inches in width and 16 feet in length.

In the wall construction, the composite lath is nailed to the studding, which has previously been covered with a layer of weatherproof paper. The lath is then covered with stucco in the regular manner and the surface is finished. This wall construction gives an air space of four inches which provides effective insulation, making the buildings warmer in winter and cooler in summer.

The interior partitions are plaster curtain walls, and, while their thickness is but 1½ inches, they have the necessary strength and the advantages of the standard wood partition. This means a saving of all studding and more floor room, giving a very great advantage in both economy and speed.

Female Employment and Morale
One significant indication of the wisdom of building in a way to satisfy the standards of living of employees is given by the records of female employment. In the earliest stages of construction, when the housing conditions were limited and incomplete, the turnover of help among the women was considerably greater than it became when the dormitories were completed and equipped and the various phases of welfare work, such as recreation and entertainment, were fully organized. Indeed, through all departments the morale of the employees steadily improved and production quickened with the advancing improvement in living conditions until both reached the highest stage with the completion of housing quarters and facilities.

Closing Reflection
The history of this community has again demonstrated that American labor wants not merely to exist, but to live; that upon living conditions is dependent enthusiasm for work; that to house workmen in buildings that are not both attractive and comfortable is a fundamental error.