TOWN ADMINISTRATION

The administration of the town of Amatol is under the direction of the Town Manager, whose office and duties correspond to those of a mayor or chief burgess. Under him are the various operating divisions headed by the Town Superintendent, the Renting Agent and the Commissary Superintendent. Their work broadly covers the operation and maintenance of those public utilities associated with the town—housing and renting, town accounting, education and the commissary management of the entire development for the plant as well as for the town.

During the construction period the commissary came under the jurisdiction of the Town Superintendent, but when the various divisions of public service were completed and turned over to the town management for operation, the commissary became a separate division reporting directly to the Town Manager.

The duties of the Town Superintendent include the important subdivision of housing of mechanics and laborers, police and fire protection, maintenance and operation of the water supply, sewerage system, town lighting, steam heating, garbage disposal and sanitation. The sanitation of town and camps is being conducted under the direction of the Chief Surgeon and a sanitary engineer, who report weekly on sanitary conditions.

The country-wide influenza outbreak in 1918 added a big load to the health and sanitation work, more particularly because of the fact that many employees lived outside the town. The importance of uninterrupted production in the various plants made this work vital. Upon direct comment by one of the highest medical department authorities on the methods of the influenza epidemic the total cases reported from the army for the month of October was 500,000, with 26,000 deaths. The deaths from influenza during the three months here were only 15 or the 2.02 per cent. of a population of 570. Of the persons who died with influenza, the majority were people coming locally to the reservation from infected districts. These cases usually developed within 48 hours of their admission to the hospital and it is believed that they were infected before coming to the reservation.

There is, of course, a large amount of garbage from the various mess halls operated by the Company, and that this may not be wasted there has been installed a piggery with 300 hogs of which about 100 are finely bred. About 3,500 pounds of garbage is collected daily and after being hauled to the piggery, which is in an outlying district, it is heated in a large steam kettle to sterilize any uncooked food before being fed to the hogs.

Included also among the operations under the direct supervision of the Town Superintendent are the ice plant, having a capacity of 30 tons a day, and a large fully equipped laundry, capable of meeting the entire requirements of both town and plant, including the cleaning of the special clothing used by plant operatives.

Town police and fire department come within the province of the Town Superintendent. The town police are distinct from the military police, having to do with the oversight and protection of civilians, whereas the duties of the military police have to do with the soldiers only. The fire department is similar in its organization to that of any town or municipality and has complete fire fighting equipment.

The Commissary Superintendent has had a very difficult undertaking feeding as many as 15,000 employees in the single day reported. In addition to the regular meals in large blocks of troops, on very short notice, meals have had to be prepared for these forces. To illustrate, between October 7th and 10th, 2,600 soldiers were brought in and had to be fed and housed, thereby taxing the resources of the commissary and the housing division to the utmost. Officers of these troops commented that there was no man who did not have three hot meals a day and a bed. Soldiers to the number of 3,800 have been fed in a single day.

The various mess halls, including those for girls, the staff, soldiers and laborers’ messes, supplied in a single day between 15,000 and 20,000 meals. During the month of October between 15,000 and 20,000 meals were furnished every week. Virtually all the meals are served on the plan of the cafeteria system and the halls are equipped in the most thorough way for efficient and prompt service.

A kindergarten and graded school is maintained for the children of the town.