AUXILIARY OPERATIONS
The auxiliary operations—those distinct from both town management and plant operations, or having to do with the two jointly—were peculiarly complex. The need for extreme speed as well as other considerations raised unique problems to be solved. An auxiliary operation is the electrical power system, which is one of the many notable features of the undertaking. The main electrical system of the plant and town consists of a three-phase, 60 cycle, 66,000-volt transmission line, which extends almost thirty miles from the power house of the Atlantic City Electric Company. This is carried on wooden poles. The crossing over the bay at Atlantic City is carried by two steel towers 1000 ft. apart.

There are two transformer banks, one at the Atlantic City and the other near Amatol, each consisting of three 4,500-kva. oil insulated, water cooled units, electrolytic lightning arresters with pole top air break switches on the 66,000-volt line and oil switches on the low tension line.

The local distribution at both the plantsite and Amatol is 4,000 volt, with 2,300 volt transformers, star connected. Motors are 440 and 220 volt, lighting 220/110 volt three wire. This local distribution is controlled through incoming and outgoing oil switches at the 500-kw. steam-electric station and the distribution lines are further protected by sectionalizing pole-top oil switches, so located and connected as to afford, selective-service to all sections of the plant, magazine and storage areas. In every case the area can be supplied by at least two feeders and in some cases by three.

The plant is guarded at night by a protective fence lighting system, which extends around the loading, the storage and the magazine sections, with a total length of nine miles, divided into twenty-six separate sections. Each section is on a selective feeder, with a searchlight that sweeps behind two sections about 1,200 feet apart. These searchlights are sweeped by current from either of the two adjacent sections, giving very wide selective service. The lights have a range of about 2,000 feet. Armed guards are stationed at every section.

For reserve service there is a 500-kw. 2,300 volt generating station within the plant area. The generating units are two 250-kw., 2,300 volt generators, direct connected to compound reciprocating steam engines.

In addition to this station there is a second reserve station of 125-kw. at the townsite. Both this and the 500-kw. station are connected through steam mains to the nearby steam heating boilers, so that electric service can be given at short notice.

Water and sewerage systems are complete in every detail. Driven wells are the source of the water supply. The wells range in depth from 120 to 335 feet and will yield 1,750,000 gallons per twenty-four hours. At the present time five of the wells are finished, giving a total of 1,350,000 gallons per twenty-four hours.

The air-lift system is employed to raise the water to the ground level where it is carried by collecting lines to a receiving basin. The basin is of 54,000 gallons’ capacity. It receives all the water from the wells and acts as a reservoir from which the pumps lift the water to town and plant. The basin is completely constructed of timber, concrete covered and partially buried in the ground. Compressed air is furnished for the air-lift pumps by four Chicago pneumatic compressors, two high pressure and two low pressure. They are in duplicate; one of each set supplies enough air to lift from the wells approximately 1,750,000 gallons of water per twenty-four hours. They are electrically driven and automatically controlled by the pressure of the water in the receiving basin. The compressed air is carried to the covered wells by underground air piping which involves 1800 feet of pipe, the sizes varying from two to five inches. Each well with its air-lift pump is to be covered with a well house. Five wells are fitted with Weber air-lift pumps.

Three Worthington triplex force pumps lift the water from the receiving basin to the elevated tanks in town and plant. Each pump, electrically driven, has a capacity of 350 gallons of water per minute, or a total capacity of a million and one half gallons per twenty-four hours.

The pumps are automatically controlled to cut out when the pressure tanks are full and to resume duty when the water in the tanks recedes to a certain level.

There is one tank at the townsite mounted on 100-ft. steel tower; six at the plantsite of the same size and height as the town tank, except the two in the rear of the 6-inch 50/50 plant, which are on 110-ft. steel towers. Each of these tanks is of 50,000 gallons' capacity. There are also three small wooden tanks, size 10 × 10 feet, mounted on frame towers located at Camp Doring, Magnolia Camp and near Heating Plant No. 1. There are also driven wells varying in depth from 130 to 150 feet at these locations.

The town water supply mains are 10-inch, 8-inch, 6-inch and 4-inch Universal cast-iron pipe, totaling 9 miles in length. In the plant there are 20 miles of mains. The hydrants in the town are what are known as the Corey and the Darling, solid stress, frost-proof, non-freezing types, with two 2½-inch independent hose nozzles and one steamer connection. At the plant the Darling type is used exclusively.

The town is served by a complete and modern sewerage system and disposal works. An 18-inch and a 15-inch trunk sewer carry all the sewage collected by the laterals from the town to the septic tanks. From the septic tanks the effluent is piped to sand filters, whence in a purified state it eventually finds its way to tide-water.

The septic tanks are three in number, each 125 feet long and 12 feet wide, with an effective depth of 9 feet and of 101,250 gallons’ capacity. The purpose of the septic tanks is to settle out and to decompose the solid matter in the sewage.

Before the sewage is run out upon the sand filter beds it is collected and retained in a dosing tank. This tank is of 30,000 gallons’ capacity and when full is automatically released and the dose run out upon one of the beds. The other beds are dosed in turn and the cycle repeated.

The sand filter beds are eight in number, comprising 3½ acres of filtering sand. The effluent is distributed upon the beds by wooden troughs. It filters through 2½ feet of sand and is caught by under drains. These empty into an 18-inch out-fall sewer, which carries away the purified effluent.

Included among the major auxiliary operations also is the Amatol Railroad, which will have 50 miles of standard gauge railroad track. It has 10 locomotives and 30 passenger cars. When the railroad was started it was virtually impossible to obtain passenger cars to carry workmen between town and plant. Some of the cars are street railway cars obtained in Chicago and remade for their present use.

The conduct of automobile and truck transportation, stables for over 500 horses, coal storage, telephone system, army barracks, and various other activities are also included among auxiliary operations. These have all been organized and conducted with the same thoroughness as the operation of the plant and the administration of the town.