All Aboard for Amatol, NJ
As a result of America’s entry into World War I, Atlantic County received a great expansion of its industrial economic base. The largest result of this expansion was the construction of Amatol, a planned shell-loading munitions plant and workers’ village that once occupied a tract of 6,000 acres between East Hammonton and Elwood. What is fascinating about Amatol and other planned communities is the speed in which they were completed. In just nine months’ time, the new town and manufactory were completed reaching a population of 7,000. Today, the Pine Barrens have all but reclaimed the former site of Amatol.

History
The history of Amatol begins in December 1917 with the incorporation of the Atlantic Loading Company. Acting as an agent of the United States Government, the Atlantic Loading Company was contracted to construct a large munitions plant and an accompanying town to house the workers. In early 1918, the Atlantic Loading Company planned to build the munitions plant and town near Camp Dix, but because of concerns over water pollution, another location had to be selected. In addition, there were also concerns over the safety of soldiers at Camp Dix due to possible accidents. In testimony given regarding Amatol, Lieutenant Colonel R.H. Hawkins stated that Camp Dix was not selected “because the commanding officer of Camp Dix told us he did not want it near his soldiers.” 

Other sites were considered, including Toms River, Lakehurst, Lacey, and Hammonton. Ultimately, Hammonton was selected. Although no definite source can be cited as to why Hammonton was selected over the other three sites, major reasons did include the potential quality of town life and the design of a safety zone. Additional testimony by Lieutenant Colonel Hawkins reveals this consideration: “We had to build rather attractive accommodations at Amatol. We had to make it just as attractive as we could in order to get people to stay there; particularly in view of the knowledge of most people of the danger.” Being situated between Atlantic City and Philadelphia, Amatol was conveniently located for ease of access to the Jersey Shore and a great metropolitan city. In addition to town amenities, Lieutenant Colonel Hawkins also explained that the size of Amatol—6,000 acres—was meant as a “substantial safety zone.” 

Construction and Development
After the final determination of the site had been made, the Atlantic Loading Company immediately went to work, which caught neighboring towns by surprise. The Tuckerton Beacon reported that on March 2, 1918, the residents of Elwood and Hammonton went to bed with a quiet night as it had been any other. To their surprise, they awoke to see a large force of strangers in their midst, a half hundred freight cars bearing the legend “Ordnance Department U.S.A.,” and heavy motor trucks noisily chugging in the streets. The next day, March 4, construction began.

A detailed description of the construction is recorded by Victor F. Hammel in the Construction and Operation of a Shell Loading Plant and the Town of Amatol, New Jersey, commonly known as the “Amatol book”. In total, 1,600 acres had to be cleared for the plant, and 38 acres had to be cleared and 255 acres trimmed for the town. This was no easy task. The land was mostly wooded with some acres of swamp and was difficult to clear due to a “dense, tangled nature of growth.” The initial workforce included forty men, and within the first week, the first bunkhouse and mess hall were built. 

Development was rapid. By June, the population was nearly 2,000, and train service was added. By August, advertisements for Amatol described it as “a city with all modern improvements with electric lights, a fire department, a police department, a modern sewage system, a modern water plant, a theatre, a Y.M.C.A, an auditorium, bowling alleys, and other city amenities.” Amatol also promised many employment opportunities, not just with the munitions plant, but with local businesses, like barbers, tailors, jewelers, watchmakers, and grocers.

By the signing of the armistice, plant and town structures included: 122 loading buildings, 159 storage buildings and magazines, 4 administration buildings, 6 office buildings, 22 industrial buildings, 7 hospitals, 16 recreation centers, 1 theatre, 18 mess halls, 4 garages, 15 warehouses, 21 railroad structures, 12 stables, 130 guardhouses, sentry boxes, searchlights, etc., 21 commercial stores, 98 male dormitories and bunkhouses, 21 female dormitories, 140 miscellaneous buildings, 24 Army barracks, 4 Y.M.C.A.’s, 11 individual residences, 33 multiple houses, 227 workmen’s houses, 1 post office, 1 school house, 2 fire houses, 444 tent tops, 96 two-roomed family apartments, 179 four-roomed family apartments, 23 three-roomed family apartments. On average, there were four buildings built per day, which was a remarkable speed. The final workforce included over 5,000 construction workers. 

The town reached a peak population of 7,000, had the capacity to house over 10,000, and was planned to accommodate a possible population of 25,000. 

Amatol Plant
Loading operations at the Amatol plant began on July 31, 1918, and on August 3, the first shell was loaded. The plant was capable of loading “60,000 shells of all sizes, 50,000 boosters, 50,000 hand grenades, and 20,000 rifle grenades per day, as well as components. To accomplish this work there were 15 smokeless-powder magazines, 33 T.N.T. magazines, 49 miscellaneous storage buildings, 642 plant structures in all.” The plant, during its operational lifespan, loaded over 9,000,000 rounds of ammunition of various types and sizes. 
Although T.N.T. was preferred and used when available, amatol was used as an alternative due to the shortage of T.N.T. Amatol was “the main charge pressed into the shell (unless straight T.N.T. or a 50/50 mix was used), [and] contains 80 percent of ammonium nitrate and 20 percent of T.N.T.”. The one disadvantage of amatol was that ammonium nitrate absorbs moisture rapidly, and in time deteriorates. The life of a shell loaded with amatol was uncertain after five years while the life of a shell loaded with T.N.T. was indefinite, certainly at least 25 years. 
The Army’s Ordnance Department took over the plant in February 1919 and denominated it Amatol Arsenal. By 1923, Amatol Arsenal ceased operations.

Camp Amatol
In October 1918, 2,400 troops arrived at Amatol to assist in operations there. Their job was to bring the output to full loading capacity and they would even perform civilian tasks. In an October 14 article, many of these soldiers decided to take French leave—an unauthorized departure—by traveling to Atlantic City. A few of the soldiers were jailed when they were unable to show “leave of absence.” By the time of the armistice, there were 3,800 officers and enlisted men at Camp Amatol, as it became known. 

There were also Camp Amatol sports teams. Basketball was a big sport played amongst soldiers, including officers. A December 6, 1918 article records, “the Hammonton five defeated the U.S. Ordnance quintet from Camp Amatol by the score of 19 to 10.” A December 13, 1918 article describes how the U.S. Ordnance Officers team defeated the Amatol team in basketball by the score of 25 to 10. 

Conclusion
In just a matter of months after signing the Armistice, the population of Amatol had virtually vanished, with only a few hundred remaining there. The former munitions complex experienced a brief resurgence in 1926 after an investor backed the construction of the Atlantic City Speedway there. The revival was short-lived as interest quickly waned among the visiting public and other investors. 

Little remains of Amatol today. After a hike through the Pine Barrens, remnants of the munitions plant, town, and racetrack can be found at the former site of Amatol. Of the many buildings and homes that were constructed, only two still remain: the now-abandoned State Police barracks outside of Hammonton and one house, which was moved to the White Horse Pike, where it is still occupied. During the 1980s, the Amatol site was considered for a landfill, but the proposal was shot down due to environmental concerns and an opposition by local residents. Recently, in 2017, more than 500 acres of Amatol (now the Pine Barrens) were preserved. 

Amatol was not the only planned community that South Jersey saw built during World War I. Belcoville, Atlantic County, was also built as a munitions plant and village. Yorkship Village (now Fairview), Camden County, was built to house shipyard workers and their families. In addition, America also saw many new military bases built, which included Camp Dix (now Fort Dix), Burlington County.

What was the overall impact of Amatol on the surrounding area? There is no reliable and readily-available information to answer this question. Where did the residents of Amatol go once operations ceased? According to the Press of Atlantic City, “Many of Amatol’s laborers, predominantly Irish and Polish from Philadelphia, stayed in the area and started families.” 

As the centennial of America’s participation in the First World War draws to a close, it is good to take a moment to remember a little town, built in a forest in New Jersey, which helped with the war effort, and provided employment for thousands of American workers.


