Mullica Township Ghost Town Amatol Was Once Munitions Village

MULLICA TOWNSHIP — Amatol existed for a matter of months nearly a century ago, but its vegetation-shrouded ruins still beguile residents in this Pinelands outpost.

When operations began in July 1918, the patchwork of munitions factories and residential streets represented a colossal achievement of urban planning. The isolated community swelled with workers who inhabited a new downtown with such amenities as a cafeteria, dance hall, and movie theater.

World War I ended on Nov. 11, 1918 — Armistice Day, later commemorated as Veterans Day — and the 6,000-acre facility was soon shuttered, its buildings dismantled as swiftly as they’d been built. What little remained fell to ruin or was scrapped.

Many of Amatol’s laborers, predominantly Irish and Polish from Philadelphia, stayed in the area and started families.

Time, of course, has taken its toll on Amatol.

Contracted by the federal government amid a world war the allies feared losing, it was built almost simultaneously with the better-known Bethlehem Loading Co. — or Belcoville — a munitions factory whose ruins are now part of the Atlantic County Park in Estell Manor.

The Atlantic Loading Co. transformed a swath of the Pinelands into a grid of streets. Its name came from the type of explosive used in munitions.

Mullica Township was chosen for its proximity to the rail line that ran from Philadelphia to Atlantic City and its relative isolation. At the time, the area was sparsely populated, an advantage in the event of an explosion at the plant. According to historical records, the workers’ city was sited two miles away from the factory in case of an explosion.

Only two buildings from Amatol are still standing: the administration building became the now-abandoned State Police barracks outside Hammonton, and one of the houses was moved to the White Horse Pike, where it’s still occupied.

Interestingly, many of Amatol’s buildings were designed to be temporary. The privately owned forest land behind the township’s recreational fields are strewn with bits of brick, concrete, and terra cotta — the materials used to construct these temporary structures.

“That’s the cheap lath they made to separate the rooms,” Benner said. “It was plaster over wire mesh. When they disintegrated, (the plaster) fell out of the wire mesh.”

The Atlantic County Utilities Authority considered building a landfill on the Amatol site in the mid-1980s, but the proposal ultimately died in part because of potential environmental impacts and an organized opposition by township residents.

Amatol is a story in itself.
