FRANKFORD ARSENAL WILL BE EQUIPPED FOR MILLION ROUNDS DAILY
Small Arms Ammunition of All Types, and Artillery Parts to Be Made
Special to The Inquirer.
WASHINGTON, April 28.

Frankford Arsenal, at Philadelphia, is to be equipped with the necessary machinery sufficient for the manufacture of one million rounds of small arms ammunition of all types per day of eight hours. 

Twelve other plants will also be enlarged and put into working order. This announcement was made by Acting Secretary of War Crowell. 

The “set up” at Frankford Arsenal will be operated only on a small scale to make such small quantities of ammunition and also to erect additional fabricated government-owned buildings at that place. In this way a plant will be installed for the manufacture, in relatively small quantities, of all metal components for artillery ammunition from one-pounder to 240 millimeter, inclusive.

Under the plans contemplated it is intended that the plant at the Frankford Arsenal will manufacture a considerable portion of the peacetime requirements. Secretary Crowell said the machinery to be installed will be carefully selected from the large amount of the most modern government-owned machinery now in private plants. 

A number of these production plants under the plans formulated will not be operated, but will be held as “standby” plants, the government arsenals being looked to for peace manufacture and for the manufacture of new types of artillery material which may be developed as a result of the experience gained during the war. 

In connection with the development at Frankford Arsenal much of the present equipment, which is old, badly worn and not of the latest design, will be removed and replaced with production machinery of the latest type. Other features of the policy announced today include plans for future operations at Amatol Arsenal, located about half way between Philadelphia and Atlantic City, and Tullytown Arsenal, near Trenton, N.J. Amatol Arsenal will be held in “stand-by” condition for the loading of smokeless powder into repelling charges. 

Other arsenals definitely decided upon for the peacetime program include Midland plant at Edgewood, Md.; Rock Island, Ill.; Watervliet, N.Y.; Watertown, Mass.; Old Hickory, Tenn.; Rochester, N.Y.; Erie, Pa.; Charleston shell machining plant; Madison, Wis., and Springfield, Mass. (small arms plant).
East Springfield, Mass., and Detroit. This program is said to be within appropriations and legislation already authorizes the necessary expenditures.